blog post draft for ambient multinetwork multicluster beta (#17138)
istio/istio.io: content/en/blog/2026/ambient-multinetwork-multicluster-beta/index.md

---
title: Ambient multi-network multicluster support is now in beta stage

> description: Istio 1.29 arrives with ambient multi-network multicluster in beta status, with improvements in telemetry, connectivity and reliability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Istio 1.29 arrives with ambient multi-network multicluster in Beta, with improvements in telemetry, connectivity and reliability.
```

date: 2025-02-16
attribution: Gustavo Meira (Microsoft), Mikhail Krinkin (Microsoft)
keywords: [ambient,multicluster]
---

Our team of contributors has been busy throughout the transition to 2026. A lot of work was done to get the multi-network multicluster for ambient to production ready state. Improvements were made in areas from our internal tests, up to the most popular multi-network multicluster asks in ambient, with a big focus on telemetry.

## Gaps in Telemetry

> For sure all the benefits from a multicluster system distributed across different networks don't come for free. With that, some complexity ends up in the mix, which makes good telemetry even more important. The Istio team understands that point and we were aware of some gaps that needed to be covered. Thankfully, on release 1.29, telemetry is now more robust and complete when our ambient data-plane operates over distributed clusters.

Reviewer 2: I think this reads a bit better

If you've deployed alpha multicluster capabilities before in multi-network scenarios, you might have noticed some source or destination labels would show as "unknown".

For context, in a local cluster (or clusters sharing the same network), Waypoint and Ztunnel are aware of all existing endpoints, and they acquire that information through xDS. Confusing metrics instead often occur in multi-network deployments where, given all the information that needs to be replicated across separate networks, the xDS peer discovery is unpractical. Unfortunately, that results in missing peer information when requests traverse network boundaries to reach a different Istio cluster.

## Telemetry Enhancements

> Overcoming that problem, Istio 1.29 now ships with augmented discovery mechanisms in its data-plane for exchanging peer metadata between endpoints and gateways sitting across different networks. The HBONE protocol is now enriched with baggage headers, allowing for Waypoints and Ztunnels to exchange peer information transparently through E/W gateways.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Overcoming that problem, Istio 1.29 now ships with augmented discovery mechanisms in its data plane for exchanging peer metadata between endpoints and gateways sitting across different networks. The HBONE protocol is now enriched with baggage headers, allowing for Waypoints and Ztunnels to exchange peer information transparently through east-west gateways.
```

1. The client in Cluster A initiates a request, and Ztunnel starts to establish an HBONE connection through the Waypoint. This means Ztunnel sends a CONNECT request with a baggage header containing the peer metadata from downstream. That metadata is then stored in the Waypoint.
1. The baggage header containing the metadata is removed, and the request is routed normally. In this case it goes to a different cluster.
1. On the receiving side, the Ztunnel in Cluster B receives the HBONE request and replies with a successful status, appending a baggage header, now containing the upstream peer metadata.
1. The upstream peer metadata is invisible to the East/West Gateway. And as the response reaches the Waypoint, it will now have all the information it needs to emit metrics about the two parties involved.

Note that this functionality is behind a feature flag at the moment. If you want to try these telemetry enhancements, they need to be explicitly activated with the `AMBIENT_ENABLE_BAGGAGE` feature option.

## Other Improvements and Fixes

> Some welcomed improvements were made regarding connectivity. Ingress gateways and waypoints can now route requests directly to remote clusters. This sets the stage for easier resiliency and enables more flexible design patterns providing the benefits that Istio users expect in multicluster and multi-network deployments.

Author: That's a good catch @kfaseela, will do.
